It's going to take us there.
And I'm not driving.
No hands, no feet.
Here we go. We are going, look at this.
into a construction zone.
Tesla's self-driving technology is here.
Completely revolutionized the world.
But can it be trusted?
Tesla drivers in a sense are guinea
pigs. So is everyone else on the road.
That's next on 60 Minutes.
It's not that widely known yet, but a
revolution is happening on our roads.
Self-driving cars have arrived in
Australia. Their Teslas fitted with
updated software, which means their
drivers can get where they need to go
with their hands off the wheel and their
feet off the pedals. There's no doubt
the technology seems impressive, but
that doesn't guarantee it's safe or even
that it works. In America, self-driving
Teslas have been involved in serious
crashes, a number of them fatal.
So, what are Australia's road and
vehicle regulators doing to stop similar
tragedies happening here? Well, not a
lot. Now, have you got the key?
I have the key. This is it.
That's the key.
Yeah. In reality, pairs to your phone,
but this little piece of plastic is our
ticket to the future.
All right, let's go.
Let's do it.
If you consider driving to be a fairly
mundane necessity to get from A to B,
strap yourself in because this Tesla is
changing our roads for better or for
worse. It's bristling with Tesla's
latest full self-driving technology,
which has come to Australia for the very
first time.
All we do is press and hold for full
self-driving supervised.
And we are away.
It's going to take us there.
Indicators on and off we go.
That is a really weird feeling.
It's bananas.
My driver or car supervisor is motoring
expert James Ward. He's head of content
at Drive and a self-proclaimed car
tragic. But today behind the wheel, he
doesn't need to do very much at all. Got
to say it's a little unnerving when
you're driving with your hands off the
wheel
and I'm not driving. Right. And but
here's the thing. I am looking and I'm
concentrating.
Tesla software makes all the decisions
for him. What does this technology do?
What are all the things this car is
doing for you right now?
Okay. So, uh, accelerating and brake is
the the easiest. So, it is
Oh, here we go.
Oh, here we go. Now, it saw We're at a
pedestrian crossing and it saw people
approaching.
You didn't break. I didn't touch it.
You're not accelerating.
There's no doubt it's impressive and
surprisingly easy to get used to. But,
as you'll see, computers can make bad
decisions, too.
Now, here we go. We are going Look at
this. We're going into a construction
zone
tonight. The benefits and the risks of
automated driving
and the mounting toll of Tesla's tech
failures.
They have been overhyping
and underengineering these vehicles for
a decade. All in an effort to prop up
their trillion dollar valuation.
Getting in a car will be like getting in
an elevator. You just tell it where you
want to go and it takes you there with
extreme levels of safety and uh that'll
be normal.
Year after year for the last decade,
Elon Musk has hyped up Tesla's
capabilities. The car can do almost
anything.
Telling customers their cars are right
on the cusp of being fully autonomous.
Less than two years away from complete
autonomy.
We're complete. Safer than a human.
To critics, their overinflated promises
about Tesla's self-driving technology
that have lulled some owners into a
false sense of security.
This is very uncomfortable so far. where
you could literally get in the car, go
to sleep, and wake up to your
destination,
creating dangerous levels of complacency
behind the wheel.
Tesla's just rolled this technology out
in Australia. What concerns do you have
for Australian drivers?
The jury is no longer out. The jury is
in. The technology has a lot of
problems.
Like Elon Musk, Dr. Missy Cummings has
spent a lifetime testing the limits of
technology.
One of the US Navy's first female
fighter pilots, she's now director for
the Autonomy and Robotics Center at
Virginia's George Mason University.
But unlike the Tesla boss, Missy doesn't
have confidence in his self-driving
cars.
I think self-driving cars do not think,
do they? They don't know. They don't
reason like humans reason. They don't
imagine.
They just execute based on patterns that
they've seen in the world. And so most
of the time they do an okay job. They
mimic human driving. They don't
mirror it.
Dr. Cummings says Teslas are at a
disadvantage because of the sensors they
rely on to decipher the world around
them. Most self-driving car
manufacturers combine three different
technologies,
deploying not only arrays of cameras,
but LAR, which uses lasers to build up a
detailed 3D picture of the vehicle's
surroundings,
and radar, which helps penetrate bad
weather and detect objects that are
further away. But Elon Musk has rejected
LAR as lame and radar as unnecessary.
For years, he's insisted that cameras
are all Teslas need to remain safe.
You can absolutely be superhuman with
just cameras. Like, you could probably
do 10 times better than humans with just
just cameras.
Tesla says they don't need the radar and
they don't need the LAR. that because
you have two eyes, they can get away
with stereoscopic vision on their cars.
And so that's all they have. And uh this
is just flatout incorrect. Robots cannot
operate in safety critical systems with
just one sensor.
The cameras are trained to recognize
obstacles that humans would avoid. What
difficulties can they have? Of the three
sensors that I talked about, LAR, radar,
computer vision, computer vision is the
most unreliable of all of those sensors.
And that means in some cases Teslas have
plowed headlong into hazards that would
be immediately obvious to human eyes or
more sophisticated self-driving
technology.
We've seen Teslas run broadside into
tractor trailers. They often do not see
stopped vehicles on the highway.
If those other sensors are so critical,
why would Tesla put these cars on the
road with cameras alone?
I think it's a great question for Tesla.
My estimation is that they're trying to
make money. Those other sensors are very
expensive.
It perhaps explains why as we drive
through Sydney, our Tesla makes a
potentially serious error.
Is now here we go. We are going. Look at
this. We are going into a construction
zone.
That was a no entry sign.
That was a no entry sign. So, we have
come into
where there is a construction zone. So,
I have taken over driving now
and we have made an error and we're
going to have to explain ourselves to
the man in the high viz. There we go.
Keep going straight. takes you back to
the freeway. We'll let the car make the
decision next time. So, uh, thank you.
Thanks, mate.
I had a moment there where I thought
there might be cars coming towards us.
When I saw those no entry signs,
I have to say, my heart stopped a
little. We're back on the freeway within
moments. No harm done this time.
But as Tesla rolls out its newest
technology on Australian roads, there
have already been other close calls. Oh,
okay. That was crazy. That was That was
definitely her intervention.
Okay. No,
Dr. Cummings is extremely concerned, but
she's not surprised. She's seen much
worse play out on American roads. I
probably get two or three calls a week
from lawyers whose clients have either
been killed or maimed in some kind of
Tesla collision. And I fully expect that
within just days, maybe weeks of this
technology rolling out there, I feel
quite confident that Australian lawyers
are going to be calling me and adding to
my list of American lawyers who are
calling me.
And now the car maker has been put on
notice.
That was one of the closest calls we've
ever had. Coming up, the miracle
survivor who took on Tesla.
Like I felt like this this technology
wasn't ready yet and that it failed
and and I just felt like like an
experiment.
911. What is the location of your
emergency?
I don't know what happened. I I end up
missing the turn. I was looking down and
I I don't know if I hit him or not.
There's a guy laying on the ground right
here. His air back car.
Okay. You hit his car.
Yeah. Oh my god. Sir.
Okay. Listen. Listen. Listen. Hey. Sir.
Hey.
When Florida police arrived at this
horrific car crash in April 2019, they
knew it was going to be a long and
confronting night.
Who else is involved?
I was driving. I dropped my phone and
looked down and I ran the stop sign and
hit the guy's car.
Which car you driving?
This car. Tesla right here.
The driver of the Tesla, finance
executive George McGee, was quick to
admit he didn't have his eyes on the
road. His Model S was operating on
autopilot when he dropped his phone and
bent down to look for it, confident any
obstacles would be detected and avoided
by the self-driving technology. Which
way were you going?
I was coming from the T here. So,
did you stop at the stop sign?
No, I didn't. Sir, I don't think I
honestly don't know. I looked down. I
didn't know how close I was to the
intersection.
The momentary distraction would prove
disastrous.
The Tesla's cameras failed to detect a
stop sign, and McGee plowed through an
intersection, slamming into a parked
four-wheel drive and two people standing
beside it. One of them, 27year-old Dylan
Angulo, was critically injured.
What do you remember of the crash?
So, I didn't remember anything. You
know, I woke up in the hospital wanting
to know what happened to me.
6 years on, the simplest tasks are still
a daily battle for Dylan. His happy,
active life was forever ruined.
I had a pelvic fracture. My sacrum was
was also fractured.
And then, you know, I had a brain bleed
and I have a lot of uh mental and
physical fatigue from that. You know, I
broke my jaw. I have this scar down here
on my jaw. Um I should have been dead.
Okay. 1 2 3.
Dylan was so badly hurt he couldn't tell
paramedics that he wasn't alone. It was
10 agonizing minutes before they
realized there was another victim. His
girlfriend Nyel Benvitas.
Uh he got ejected.
He got ejected.
Okay. Wait a minute though. There's
ladies under when it's fun.
There's a pair of ladies flipflops.
Nel was thrown more than 20 m from the
car.
She's right there. Right there in the
bushes.
It would be weeks before Dylan was told
she didn't survive.
You know, I have to remember for the
rest of my life that uh I didn't bring
back Nyell to her family. I didn't bring
her back home.
you know, I'm dealing with this pain
that I have every day. It's always
reminding me, you know, I'm trying to
have faith and trying to to
trying to believe that that uh that
Nabelle losing her life will hopefully
save more lives
and showing the world what what these
cars are capable of.
Time for trial for car maker Tesla and
its CEO Elon Musk.
Dylan and Nel's family sued. Not only
the driver of the Tesla, but the car
manufacturer itself. They boldly refused
a private settlement, going public with
their fight to hold the richest man in
the world accountable for his overhyped
claims about his vehicle's abilities.
And they won. There has been a verdict
in the Tesla trial.
A federal jury in Florida has found
automaker Tesla partially liable. In an
unprecedented ruling made just two
months ago, Tesla was found to be partly
liable because its autopilot software
failed to prevent the crash. The court
awarded the victims $375
million. We can be proud that we stood
up and that we did everything in our
power
to help shine light on what's going on.
Why was it so important for you to sue
Tesla?
Like I felt like this this technology
wasn't ready yet and that it failed. You
know, it killed killed my bell and
severely injured me and and I just felt
like like an experiment.
It was a historic verdict. Uh this was
an opportunity for a jury to sit through
three weeks of evidence and decide based
upon that evidence to send a very strong
message to Tesla. You you cannot use our
public roadways as a test track.
Brett Shriber is one of America's top
lawyers in wrongful death cases.
He led the charge against Tesla in the
courtroom, convincing a jury that while
the driver was partly to blame, Tesla's
technology failed to live up to
expectation and the company should
therefore bear some responsibility.
The driver dropped his phone. He was
distracted.
Yes.
How could Tesla be held responsible for
that?
This was a case about shared
responsibility.
There is no question that what this man
did was wrong, but he also had an
expectation based upon the marketing,
based upon, you know, the fact that he
spent $5,000 extra dollars on something
called enhanced autopilot.
Well, one would think that that would do
something and it did nothing.
Proving the technology had failed was
made even more challenging when
incredibly Tesla insisted data from the
car didn't exist.
It was later revealed to be an outright
lie.
When that bodywn camera footage was
being filmed, Tesla had already received
over the air a full packet of data that
told them exactly how the system worked,
how it failed, and why this crash
happened literally before the dust had
finished settling from the crash. And
then for the next 4 and 1/2 years, they
claimed they didn't have it. And in
fact, they went so far as to delete it
and they got caught.
When the data was discovered, Tesla was
sanctioned by the court for withholding
evidence and that evidence was
indisputable.
The data from the autopilot computer
showed that all the autopilot system
did, it didn't warn, it didn't break.
All it did 1.3 seconds before impact was
shut off.
Dr. Missy Cummings says it's a clear
demonstration of the flaws in Tesla's
technology. A worldleading expert in
autonomous systems, Missy testified
against Tesla in the trial. She says the
car maker has been effectively
experimenting with its software on
public roads, putting lives at risk.
Tesla, unlike other car companies, has
what they call beta testing. So indeed
when you anyone gets into a car you'll
get this warning that says you're
driving beta software that is a software
development speak for untested not
mature and so even Tesla admits that
this test that their software in their
cars is not mature and they constantly
are pushing overthe-air updates to fix
bugs just like in your phone you will
have to constantly update it. That's
what happens in Tesla vehicles.
So Tesla drivers in a sense are guinea
pigs.
I think Tesla drivers are guinea pigs,
but I think the bigger problem is so is
everyone else on the road
where you could literally get in the
car, go to sleep, and wake up to your
destination.
For Brett Shriber, Elon Musk's
overinflated promises were at the heart
of the case. How big is that
contradiction between what we've heard
from Tesla
about this technology and what we see on
the roads and in the evidence in court?
You have Tesla in the showroom, right?
And and Tesla in the showroom talks
about how they have created a full
self-driving car and then you put that
up against Tesla in the courtroom and
Tesla in the courtroom talks about how
this is just a driver assistance
feature. It requires constant
supervision. No one else in the world
who is producing this technology calls
it auto anything because it's not
and and the jury saw that.
How do you view Elon Musk's role in all
this?
He set the stage. He created the
expectation
in ordinary consumers that this car was
more than what it ever was. They shout
from the hilltops that this is full
self-driving, a car that can drive
itself. It's fully autonomous. And then
they show up in court and they go, "But
look what we say in the owner's manual
that no one has ever read."
What the hell?
It just tried to turn right across
there.
Now it's Australia's turn to be Tesla's
training track. It's now decided to go
behind a parked car.
And Dr. Cummings has warned authorities
here about the dangers. What response
did you get from the Australian
government?
Nothing.
One month into Tesla's Australian roll
out of self-driving cars, owners here
have clocked more than a million
kilometers using the new technology. And
as we discovered, it's a real novelty
is I'm supposed to be concentrating. I'm
supposed to be paying attention and I am
looking and my foot's hovering.
But I dare say the more you do this,
the more you'll trust it.
Car expert James Ward is behind the
wheel, but his hands aren't on it. Tesla
calls this full self-driving supervised.
So the supervised word is the key here.
And this is this is where we are in this
sort of gray area of technology where
the capability of the car outweighs the
legislation and the the understanding of
what this this can mean. So in
Australia, we are allowed up to what is
known as level two autonomy. So that
requires the human to be fully in
control of the vehicle. The capability
of this car is very much moving into
that level three technology space. But
in Australia, our legislation will not
allow a level three car. So we need
these safeguards for the system to be
allowed in Australia.
Is that supervised word to protect road
users or Tesla?
Arguably, it's there to protect Tesla.
It's there to allow this to be in
market.
Automated vehicles or AVs are coming to
Australia soon. So we need to get ready.
This ad was released by CRA a few months
ago, but the federal government is
anything but ready. In April this year,
after a meeting with Tesla, a top
government policy adviser wrote to
transport departments across the
country, warning that the technology is
extremely advanced and brings risks of
drivers becoming complacent or over
reliant on the system while still being
liable.
Incredibly, instead of bolstering
regulations, the main concern raised was
how to respond to media questions about
safety.
You just can't bury your head in the
sand and think, well, we'll deal with
that, you know, when it arrives. Once
it's in the market, it's very hard to
control and very hard to pull back.
Russell White is CEO and founder of the
Australian Road Safety Foundation.
He's alarmed by the government's lack of
action and the potential consequences.
I think in our current setup, drivers
aren't trained well enough full stop in
our current system to let alone
introduce something that is going to
require a a a large amount of
self-regulation.
Just that startle effect, the the the
time it takes for the person to go,
"What's happening? It's too late. the
crash on the roads already happened.
What will it take for the government to
properly address this technology?
Well, I think sadly it's going to take
something major to to happen and my fear
is once the genie out of the bottle uh
we won't know the full impact of that
maybe until some years time and and
sadly that may cost a lot of lives.
Autonomous vehicle expert Dr. Missy
Cummings has seen the horrific
consequences of Tesla's technology
faults in the United States. and is
adamant the same could happen here.
I do think your regulators should be
asking Tesla, how much training have you
done on Australian street signs? Or have
they done anything to make sure that
this car knows Australia is different
than America?
In fact, so concerned was Dr. Cummings
about Tesla bringing its self-driving
cars here, she wrote to the federal
government several years ago. I wanted
to communicate to them that there were
serious problems with this technology
and that they needed to pay attention.
What response did you get from the
Australian government?
Nothing.
The problem for Australians with
self-driving cars is this. The
technology has outpaced our decision
makers. As it stands, the cars are legal
as long as the driver is in control. but
it's at the discretion of the police.
So, if something goes wrong, you could
lose points and be fined for driving
with your hands off the wheel. The
federal government is planning to create
new laws for autonomous vehicles, but
not before the end of next year. We
wanted to know why it was taking so
long, but the Minister for Transport,
Katherine King, didn't want to speak
with us. Curiously, neither did Tesla.
leaving those who've seen the failures
firsthand to do the talking.
Don't be fooled by
by the marketing of these cars. Don't be
fooled by what Elon Musk says.
Dylan Angulo lost his girlfriend and was
left with life-changing injuries after a
Tesla on autopilot plowed into the pair
in Florida in 2019.
He successfully sued the car maker in a
case that has prompted a slew of similar
litigation. And while Dylan says he's
yet to find peace with what happened, it
has given him purpose. I'm hoping that,
you know, us exposing Tesla and and
showing what they did to us will also
help bring justice to other families and
and and hopefully shine light and show
people
that that these cars aren't aren't safe.
Don't trust them with your family.
Hello, I'm Amelia Adams. Thanks for
watching 60 Minutes Australia. Subscribe
to our channel now for brand new stories
and exclusive clips every week. And
don't miss out on our extra minute
segments and full episodes of 60 Minutes
on 9ow.com.au
and the N Now app.
Offering yourself up for science is a
noble endeavor, but be warned, it can
hurt like hell. I've just returned from
a rather painful adventure around
Australia with a group of researchers on
an extraordinary mission. While most of
us run from the dangerous, creepy
crawies of the outback. They
deliberately seek out spiders,
scorpions, and centipedes and then
invite them to attack. The scientist's
aim is to get bitten to understand the
severity of the stings they inflict.
They then use the venom to develop much
needed medicines and painkillers. And
guess what? It's work that's already
saving lives.
The Australian outback is a thing of
beauty with its unique red dirt and even
more unique wildlife.
And hidden here in this sea of sand and
spin effects, a species that could both
kill you and incredibly save your life.
This spectacular place is Oruramin
Station, smack bang in the middle of the
Northern Territory, a part of the world
that isn't just a draw card for
tourists, but also scientists looking
for medical miracles.
Sam. Hi.
Good to meet you. Yes, sir.
So, this is your research lab? It
is.
Dr. Sam Robinson is a
biofarmarmacologist.
In short, that means he studies animal
and plant toxins with the hope of
discovering new life-changing medicines.
And his experiments are unorthodox to
say the least. He's basically a human
lab rat who gets stung by potentially
deadly bugs all in the name of research.
You're the embodiment of no pain, no
gain.
Exactly. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. You
know, when you get a whopping great wasp
and you know that it's going to it's
going to hurt like you're getting your
finger smashed with a with a hammer.
And it's that anticipation. It's just
awful building up to that. You know it's
going to hurt and then you test it and
you find out something new and it it it
supersedes that and it's it's a
fantastic feeling just to to know that
you've discovered something.
When it comes to medical ethics, Sam
literally can't even ask people to cop
these potent venoms. So that means if he
wants to know what they do, the only way
to find out is to roll up his own
sleeve. There'd be people sitting at
home thinking, "Is this black mad?"
My wife asked the same question.
Actually, there is a real thrill in
discovery and finding out something that
in all of human history, no one else has
sort of known or at least recorded. Um,
you you get a buzz out of it. What's the
most painful thing you've coped so far?
I was recently in South America and and
collected some wasps. It just smashed my
hand. It's like I liken it to imagine
having sort of your your flesh peeled
back on your finger and then a pair of
pliers just gripping the bone and
squeezing and you know it's not over in
10 minutes. This was going on for like 3
or 4 hours and you're getting to the
point where you're thinking you know
what if this gets worse. You know
there is method to the madness here. In
the world of pharmarmacology, venom
toxins are a treasure trove of new
possibilities, helping create the next
generation of gamechanging medicines. In
fact, it's more than likely that a drug
derived from venom has saved the life of
someone you know.
Your secret medicine, I guess now, is
not so secret. It's from a snake.
Exactly. Right. It definitely is from a
snake. So, yeah, I'm petrified of them.
If I saw one, I'd be gone. But look, I
need to thank them at the end of the
day.
Emma Wilson is serious about her health
and in 2015 was bitten by the
bodybuilding bug. She was preparing for
the World Championships when that dream
came to an abrupt halt because she felt
a pain in her chest. So, I was perfectly
technically in good health on the
outside
and then all of a sudden
and on the inside I wasn't I wasn't a
well person
and went to bed and then I got up and it
was something was going on. I knew I
needed medical attention. Don't know
what it was. Just something come over,
got myself to the hospital um and a long
story out of it. I was actually having a
heart attack without me realizing what
was going on.
The grandmother of two would have died
if it wasn't for the work of doctors and
now is kept alive by a class of
medication called ACE inhibitors derived
from the venom of the Brazil viper. It's
used to treat high blood pressure, heart
failure, and often prescribed following
heart attacks.
If it wasn't for them, then technically
be I wouldn't be here cuz I need that
medication to keep my cholesterol down.
This is an orb weaver spider. All right.
Am I holding this? Yeah.
See, your research is supposed to help
sick people.
Yeah.
This makes me feel sick.
It's It's Think of it as doing good for
you. You know, it's helping you get over
the
the fear.
That'll do, mate. Thank you.
To understand venom and the kind of
medical potential locked inside it, Dr.
Sam needs specimens and lots of them. So
when you get bitten, what are you
actually looking for?
You know, you can liken it to something
like wine tasting where you get a you
get a feel for a different wine, you
know, and you can describe that
differently. Um you can do exactly the
same with stings.
You know, wine afficionados will swirl a
glass of red, have a sip, and you know,
take note of all the different elements
of the experience. You're you're kind of
a venom afficionado.
Yeah, that's exactly it. So what's this
one here?
Uh so what you'll find under the bark of
some trees are these assassin bugs. Um,
and that can give you a pretty painful
sting.
This sounds like you're talking from
experience.
Yeah, absolutely.
The assassin buggy is significant
because Sam's team has harnessed its
powers for good, hoping to turn its
venom into a potent insecticide that'll
reduce our dependency on chemicals in
farming. And he assures me that despite
its ominous name, the critter isn't
actually a killer. Instead, scientific
journals describe its sting politely as
just intensely painful. A feeling Sam
has cpped plenty of times, all in a
day's work.
All right. Well, if it's not going to
kill me, I guess it's part of my
commitment to figuring out how your job
works. I guess I got to give this a go.
Grab it with your finger and your thumb
and it should sting you.
Just jeez. I'm a little bit scared here,
Tim.
You should be.
Okay. And so, just how painful is it?
Well, oh, this comes in waves.
Yeah,
you choose to do this.
Deep in the central Australian desert,
I'm about to copper sting from an
assassin bug. With me here is scientist
Dr. Sam Robinson, whose unorthodox
research methods could lead to the
discovery of groundbreaking medical
treatments.
I can see the venom coming out, but he's
not stinging me.
Deliberately inflicting pain in yourself
definitely defies all logic, but I'm
certainly not doing this just for fun.
The work that Dr. Sam Robinson does, the
pain he inflicts on himself and me, it
could one day help save someone's life.
There he is.
So, this is your day job.
Excuse the embarrassing arm flapping,
but nothing can prepare you for this
pain. Hopefully my reaction shows you
this seriously hurts.
You choose to do this.
Oh, it's just like every now and then
little darts of pain and it started off
there. I can feel it widening into my
hand and
up into my arm. Ohh.
Oh, there's a second wave. Putting
myself up as a scientific guinea pig
will give Sam vital insights into how
venom works, which is the foundation
block of miracle drug discovery. Oh,
so that'll last about 5 10 minutes.
Oh, good.
Yeah.
Not long now.
So, for all the pain you've been
through,
how does this help medical science in
the future?
Yeah. So, pain is common. Different
types of pain are really common. There
can be side effects from injuries or
medication, all sorts of things. Um, and
at the moment, medicine doesn't have the
tools to deal with it. We rely a huge
amount on uh opioids, so things like uh
morphine and codine. Um, but these have
massive problems outside of of abuse as
well. Um, so we need alternatives. So
the goal really here is if you can find
new chemicals that cause pain, these are
going to tell you new things about your
pain pathways. And we can use that
information to develop painkillers. And
we've done that with some of the work um
that I've been doing.
After a couple of days in the desert,
we're off to the other side of the
country to a very different environment,
the rainforests of southeast Queensland.
Here we meet up with Dr. Sam Robinson's
colleague, Professor Ireina Veta. She's
the director of the Center for Pain
Research at the University of
Queensland. And we're on the hunt for
one of the most dangerous trees on the
planet, the Gimpy Gimpy, aka the suicide
tree.
Covered in spines. Wow.
These afficionados rated as the third
most painful sting in all of Australia.
But yep, you guessed it, this tree is
also a potential lifesaver. You love
this tree, don't you?
I do love this tree. Yes.
Why?
The gimpy gimpy activates your pain
sensing nerves in a way that we've never
seen before. We've discovered a new pain
gene. Of course, when you discover um a
pain gene that when you activate it, you
cause pain. Then the flip side is if you
block it, we might be able to inhibit
pain and that's really important for
people with chronic pain.
These two have been willing to be hurt
by the plant that they love. So, I had
to see what all the fuss was about here,
too. from the nasty spikes that cover
the gimpy gimpy's leaves.
Looks nasty.
It'll be fine.
It's just pain. It will hurt, but it
won't harm you.
Okay, here we go. Things I do for this
damn job.
Oh, yep. There it goes.
You didn't notice it?
You feel them go in.
Oh. Oh, there it goes. Okay.
Oh, it's a strange very different
feeling to the assassin bug.
Good. Yeah,
you guys like this.
This is not fun. The welts from the
suicide tree are nasty. And while the
assassin bug pain lasted for about 10
minutes, I'd be feeling this one for
days.
I'm glad I've experienced it and I hope
to never do it again.
I'm glad you enjoyed it.
Back at the lab at the University of
Queensland, Ireina can show why the
Gimpy Gimpy sting research is so
important. The hope is that it will one
day provide critical pain relief for
cancer patients undergoing chemotherapy.
Patients receiving certain types of
chemotherapy develop um very deil
debilitating pain that presents as cold
hypersensitivity or temperature
hypersensitivity.
Um and the gimpy gimpy happens to do a
very similar thing and so we can
understand the molecular mechanisms and
then use that knowledge to treat
patients receiving chemotherapy.
The pain that a lot of chemo patients
suffer is so bad that they end up
pulling out of the treatment. So if you
can help them deal with that pain, you
could end up helping save lives.
Yeah, absolutely. Um at the moment we
basically have no nothing to treat this.
Um you can either reduce the dose of the
chemo that's obviously not good for a
cancer. you can just stop the treatment
altogether. Um, and that's, you know,
very detrimental. So, being able to
prevent these side effects and treat
them effectively is really, really
important.
And you think you're heading in that
direction?
I know we're heading in that direction.
The breakthroughs just keep on coming.
Gar, formerly known as Fraser Island, is
one of Australia's natural wonders.
Famous for its dingoes and dunes, it's a
holiday destination packed full of
adventure and wildlife, some of which is
incredibly deadly.
Keep your eyes open for them. Don't let
them bite you.
Professor Glenn King and his research
team from the University of Queensland
have discovered a new molecule in the
venom of one of Australia's most
notorious creatures, the funnel web
spider, which could revolutionize the
treatment of stroke and heart attack.
That's a really good one. Really nice.
Yeah. Great. We found we could give that
compound from the spider up to 8 hours
after the stroke started and we could
still reduce the brain damage by up to
2/3. It was an incredible result. And
what we subsequently found is we could
also get protection of the heart after a
heart attack with the exact same
molecule.
It must be a pretty awesome feeling
knowing that this hard work you've done
could save someone's life.
It feels fantastic. I mean, the idea
that we could potentially have
discovered a drug in an Australian
spider that could save the lives of
people around the world that were having
a stroke or a heart attack is is really
very exciting. Harnessing the potential
of the world's most deadly creatures,
animals that make Australia famous has
ironically turned the villain into the
hero. Australia is the kind of the place
to be if you're going to be studying
venoms. Australia is absolutely the best
place to be and I think it's fair to say
Australia is the epicenter of of venom
based drug discovery uh around the
world.
In a medical revolution spearheaded by
Aussie scientists, our deadly backyard
has become a savior and stingloving
researchers like Dr. Sam Robinson reckon
that the untapped potential of our
incredible biological diversity could be
the future of medicine. A lot of people
don't realize that most of our drugs are
either directly derived or actually
inspired from a natural source. Um, so
in the long run, hopefully we're
identifying a whole library of new
targets and identify whole new classes
of drugs. For people like you, this is a
gold mine out here.
Yep. Australia is a gold mine.
Hello, I'm Tom Steinford. Thank you for
watching 60 Minutes Australia. Subscribe
to our channel now for brand new stories
and exclusive clips every week. And
don't miss out on our extra minute
segments and full episodes of 60 Minutes
which are on nnow.com.au
and the N now app.
It's tiny, almost invisible, one of the
most dangerous creatures on Earth. Just
wait till you see the havoc it causes.
And this little monster is one of ours.
A jellyfish called Irakani that spends
the summer months in the warm tropical
waters up north. Now, if that word
Irakanji means nothing to you, you're
not alone. Not only is this the most
venomous Aussie of them all, it's one of
those great scientific mysteries. It's
also one of our bestkept secrets. Hardly
a tourist attraction and certainly not
the kind the tourist industry wants to
see on national television.
Get on over my skin off
to me and my back really hurting my arm.
It's killing me. Both my arms.
Theres Caret is going through
unbelievable pain.
Oh, I just can't wait. He just
pain beyond the reach of any drug.
She's been poisoned by Australia's least
known but most venomous creature.
My face. I just want to look at my skin.
It's driving me nuts.
It's the Irkangi jellyfish. So small
it's almost invisible, but within its
tail, a toxin that can kill.
It's incredibly powerful. What it does
to the human body is unbelievable.
To somebody watching it, you just can't
imagine that the body can survive going
through that.
Irakani were first discovered in
Australia's tropical north more than 50
years ago. But remarkably, it's only now
that their deadly potential is being
understood.
They're tiny, about the size of a
fingernail, and they're equipped with a
lethal sting.
I don't think that he even saw what hit
him. I mean, they're so small and
they're almost invisible in the water.
It was Easter Sunday two years ago and
American businessman Robert King was
fulfilling a lifelong dream snorkeling
on the Great Barrier Reef.
But within minutes of jumping into the
waters off Opal Reef, he was stung by an
Irai.
In incredible pain, Robert was rushed to
Townsville Hospital.
his blood pressure so high that he
suffered a brain hemorrhage.
By the time his partner Michelle Carlson
arrived in Australia, Robert was in a
coma. Michelle spent the next 2 weeks by
his side, but Robert never regained
consciousness.
By 1:30, they had done the last CAT
scan. They did an MRI and um his brain
had stopped functioning.
I didn't want that that death to go in
vain. I wanted um
I wanted it to stand for something. I
didn't think that more people should die
from a jellyfish that nobody knew about.
Robert King was the second confirmed
death from Irakanji poisoning in
Australia. But scientists believe the
real figure is higher. This after all is
one of the world's most toxic species.
You got your range of nasties. You've
got your spiders and snakes and your
your death adders and your taipans and
your funnel webs and all these nasties.
And the box jelly is at the top of the
heap of the nasties. It's incredibly
incredibly venomous. The Irakani,
it's way up there. It's so far up above.
It kicks the box jelly's butt.
Marine biologist Lisa Gershwin has been
studying the urici for the past 6 years.
They have well-developed eyes with
lenses and retinas and corneas, and we
know experimentally that they can see,
but they have no brain. And that just
blows my mind. I I don't understand how
they do that, but I'm fascinated by it.
Because we know so little about the
uracani, Lisa fears cases of death or
injury are going undiagnosed.
It mimics a heart attack. It mimics
maybe a stroke. Um it mimics all kinds
of things and it doesn't leave a mark on
the body. So the chances for diagnosing
an ikenji related death are very slim. I
think we all do recognize that it's very
likely there have been more deaths
that have been put down to heart
attacks, strokes.
Absolutely. Absolutely. Or drowning.
Yeah. Absolutely.
The problem that we've got with Iranji
syndrome is that there's probably at
least half a dozen species of animal
that can cause it. We don't even know
what they are yet and we don't know how
similar their venoms are. So the
question is what do you actually create
your antivenenom to?
Dr. Paul Cullen is a trauma specialist
based in cans. walking away.
He says just as scientists struggle to
understand the uracani, doctors find it
very difficult to treat its victims.
I I have many memories of people coming
in in severe pain and greatly
distressed. And I think that's that's
the image that sticks in your mind. Um
and it's pain that it's very difficult
to control.
How many victims do you treat a year?
That's one of the very interesting
things about it. It it varies a lot and
it ranges from about 30 up to um a peak
of 120 or almost 120 which is what we
saw a couple of years ago which is the
worst ever season that we've seen.
From Broom to Bundberg they inhabit the
seductive waters of our tropical north.
Australia's tourist playground brings in
big money and that makes the Uricangi a
very sensitive issue.
Don't touch me. Got a net.
With netting offering little protection,
lifeguards regularly sweep some of our
most popular beaches.
There's a whole bunch in there. There's
some more. There's another
closing them in the middle of summer,
sometimes for weeks at a time.
Amazing, isn't it? Something that small
will make you sick.
In the few days that I've been up here,
so many people have told me that I have
more chance of being killed in a car
crash heading to the beach than I do by
an Iraqi. Now, that's absolutely true.
But this is more than a debate about
public health. It's about money. Big
money. Authorities estimate that after
the two confirmed deaths, tourism in far
north Queensland lost $65 million.
Little wonder then that stingers are
such a touchy subject.
We've been down here working on the
beaches, filming and also doing research
on them. Then had local tourist
operators, owners of apartments and
stuff like that come down and physically
abuse us for, you know, you guys are
scaring tourists away from it. Get out
of here, you know, go somewhere else.
You know,
Richard Fitzpatrick has faced more than
the hostility of local tourist
operators. He's a scientist and while
researching the jellyfish, Richard has
felt the pain of an Irakani sting.
To me, the symptoms I had was like a a
cricket bat bashing against your back,
against your kidneys constantly and then
having a hot knife randomly jabbed
throughout your body.
Richard Fitzpatrick was lucky. He
recovered quickly, but not so his
colleagues Jamie Seymour and Theres
Coret. The only place body that was
uncovered was just around my lips up to
the side just here duck dive from the
surface and caught one right across the
top right across the the face through
here.
They too were scientists at the
forefront of Irakanji research in
Australia.
Face is driving me nuts.
Pain starting to come back again.
Overall pain
know all the dangers. They take all the
precautions, but even the professionals
get stuck.
Richard was there to film them as they
struggled to cope with the urici toxin.
You know, watching Jamie and Theresa in
the hospital that night was just
absolutely frightening. I mean, Jamie
was bad, but Theresa was really bad.
And, you know, they had pumped her full
of morphine as much as she could
possibly handle. And um and like the
pain just wasn't dropping. It just
wasn't taking the edge off the pain. And
I mean that was almost that was over 24
hours on my 48 hours she was like that
and like it's really frightening cuz you
got the doctors there and everyone no
one knew what to do with it.
And the politics surrounding Irakanji
can be just as poisonous as it sting.
Jaime Seymour agreed to speak to 60
Minutes, but at the last minute he
pulled out, saying the issue was so
sensitive that talking could cost him
scarce research dollars and possibly his
job.
Are you frightened of these little
creatures?
I am. I I respect them very much.
Lisa Gershwin has offered to take me on
one of her research trips.
Show me where the Uricangi jellyfish
lives. We just have to make sure that
every possible place that an aricanji
can possibly get in contact with your
skin uh is sealed up. All it takes is
just a touch of venom and it makes you
bloody sick and as we know it can kill.
This pest is at its worst when the
weather is at its best. Clear skies,
smooth seas, a light northerly breeze.
conditions that scientists say draw the
Euracani closer to the coast.
How many urices do you think are out
there?
Uh there's at least seven that I'm
confident are I can producing species.
Um, of those, this one, uh, curricula
barnsai, is the only one that's
currently named and classified. These
other six, we know nothing about them.
They don't even have names yet.
Back in her Townsville lab, Lisa is now
building a collection of Iraqi, slowly
piecing together vital information. It's
expensive work that attracts little
funding, but she's being helped by an
unlikely donor, Michelle Carlson, the
partner of Robert King. and they're all
I wanted to raise money so so that I
could support that research so that more
people wouldn't be killed
um you know that more people wouldn't
die.
Lisa Gershwin believes she's discovered
the particular species of Iraqi that
killed Robert.
The way that we came to that conclusion
was in matching up the stinging cells
that were retrieved from Bob's clothing.
But more important for Michelle is the
knowledge that his death helped save
others.
Bob was an organ donor and so he
actually saved four four lives um here
in Australia and
you know to me he's a hero.
Um to me even in his death he was still
caring about people.
In his memory, Michelle Carlson has
given more than $15,000
to researching the Iraqi.
A not insignificant amount considering
that Australia's total research funding
for this deadly jellyfish is just half a
million dollars. And that say the people
who know best is simply not good enough.
It's not about
banging drums for more money. It's about
protecting people from dying. It's about
protecting people from suffering uh uh
the pain and the illness that comes with
it. That's really terrible.
We don't know anything about their
ecology. We don't know anything about
their venoms. That we don't know how
they reproduce. We don't know anything
about them. Do you subscribe to this
argument that yes, there's only been two
documented deaths from Iraqi syndrome,
but have there been more that have been
put down to other causes?
I believe there have been more. I think
most of us working with Iraqis do
believe there have been more. Denying it
isn't going to change the facti
is real. Akenji can kill people. We've
got to get it right and we've got to get
it right soon.
Hello, I'm Tom Steinford. Thanks for
watching 60 Minutes Australia. Subscribe
to our channel now for brand new stories
and exclusive clips every week. And
don't miss out on our extra minute
segments and full episodes of 60 Minutes
on 9ow.com.au
as well as the NOWO app.
Jellyfish. At the mere mention of the
name, most of us imagine shapeless,
rubbery, and even disgusting creatures.
In any case, they're something we do not
wish to touch. It isn't until we see
them underwater that they transform into
graceful beings.
In the course of evolution, jellyfish
have developed unbelievably clever
skills and have conquered every habitat
in our oceans.
To protect themselves, they've developed
weapons that can also become dangerous
to humans.
Most jellyfish are not a threatened
species.
In the large family of jellyfish, this
box jellyfish is the most dangerous.
closely followed by this siphon of four,
the Portuguese man of war.
For most of us, the word jellyfish
evokes negative feelings. The term
medusas is more appropriate and it gives
it the feel of a mysterious and
dangerous beauty.
This is Dr. Ghart Yams, one of the most
knowledgeable experts on medusas. He
will be introducing us to the unusual
life cycle of these animals.
A beach in Echen on the Baltic coast.
Numerous Aurelia have been washed
ashore.
Touching? No problem. Orurelas do not
sting. For these two young boys, the
jellyfish are a welcome change from
their boring suntanning monotony.
Gearart Yams on the creation and
development of Medus.
Most people feel disgusted by these
animals, but in reality they are smooth,
soft, and what's even more interesting,
their history goes back 500 million
years.
During this time, they have developed
the most fascinating shapes and most
interesting lifestyles.
They live both in the deep sea and here
on the Baltic coastline.
If we ignore for a moment the massive
influxes of medusers on the coasts of
the North Sea and Baltic Sea from time
to time, the oceans are not necessarily
packed with medusers, even if these
images make it look that way.
Where do medusers come from? How and
where do they reproduce? The life cycle
of jellyfish or medusas is characterized
by a shift from one generation to the
next and by a change between the cesile
and the free swimming states. These
Aurelia have separate males and females
but their young are quite unique. The
female distributes tiny lavi in the
water and they then attach themselves to
anything suitable.
These tiny eight armed discs which are
trying to free themselves from a cesile
polip with all their might are tiny
medusas. But before they get to this
point about 14 days have passed and this
polip originally looked quite different.
Recording this process requires
sophisticated technology and filming
techniques.
Yams documents the individual stages
with an endo camera in his laboratory at
the zoological institute of Hamburg
University.
The original medusa lavi have produced a
polip which bears no relation to
medusers at all. By the way, the sole
purpose of this polip is to catch food.
Not until the polip colony has reached
an optimum state of nutrition can the
separation process begin.
The polyp have changed completely and
now look like little fur cones. The
separation process of the tiny medusers
is called strobulation which comes from
the Greek for fur cone. These tiny discs
will later develop into large medusers.
But only around 1% of them will survive.
The rest will become prey.
These tiny medusers are already
perfectly equipped. Between the tiny
arms, they have a number of different
sensory organs with which they can see,
taste, and also control their position
in the water.
The gelatinous animals consist of 98%
water.
The life cycle of a Medusa can be from 1
to 30 years depending on the species.
During this time, they can grow up to
200 times their initial size.
But there are also others that like to
feed on plankton. Basking sharks, for
example.
Just like the Aurelas, these 10 m long
sharks prefer animal plankton that they
filter through their giant gills.
The Aurelas are also part of the menu of
the basking sharks. The more the better.
The sharks have competition. The lion's
main medusa has long stinging tentacles,
and it has already stored a bunch of
prey, orurelas.
It's doubtful whether this lion's mane
would even be digestible by the sharks.
Many Medusa researchers consider this to
be the most beautiful of all jellyfish.
the crowned medusa. There's no doubt
that researching this creature is one of
the most expensive projects in marine
zoology. This Medusa lives in great
depths.
In order to find these crowned jewels of
all marine research subjects, we have to
travel to Norway, 25 km north of Bergen,
to the Lura Fjord.
Harken Mosby, a Norwegian research
vessel famous for spectacular
discoveries.
An ROV is being launched in the waters
of the Lura Fjord. It's a sophisticated
remote operated vehicle equipped with
cameras, lights, and collection bins.
Seen through the eyes of the underwater
robot. The ROV will dive to several
hundred meters. This whole exercise has
one objective to find periphilery
which is the Latin name for the crowned
medusa.
1,00 W xenon spotlights brighten up even
the dark ice cold waters of the Lura
fjord. The descent has started.
This is the control room. The ROV is
being completely controlled from here.
This acrylic tube which is attached to
the robot is part of a vacuum pump. The
scientists want to try and catch
periphiller, but it's not that easy. The
skill of the ROV operator is crucial.
These mysterious medusas live at great
depths around 1,000 m out in the open
ocean. But now scores of them have
entered the Norwegian fjord and are
destroying all life there. They don't
feed on fish but on their lavi. These
medusers are reported to reach the
biblical age of 30 years. ROV operator
Azia Steinland is a master in handling
this heavy machine. He switches the
spotlights off. Periphiller appears as a
grand firework with lights flashing
everywhere. It possesses the ability of
bioluminescence,
a characteristic known in numerous deep
sea creatures.
Lights on. As of yet, we don't know
exactly why this jellyfish is red.
But Yams can answer what the
bioluminescent signals mean.
The only explanation we can find for
these lighting effects is that they're a
defense against predators and a form of
camouflage in this exceedingly dark,
deep habitat.
If a predator touches the Medusa, it
reacts spontaneously with a bright,
sudden yellow flash of light which might
frighten off the enemy. If that doesn't
work and the enemy touches it again, the
Medusa contracts convulsively
while at the same time sending out
myriads of tiny, brightly luminescent
particles which diffuses the outline of
the jellyfish and makes it undetectable.
Just after midnight in the control room,
this is the time when peripher ventures
into shallower waters. The chances are
in our favor.
The first medusa disappears up in the
suction tube.
It's possible to catch them in nets, but
they will be dead before they got to the
surface.
5:00 a.m. The robot is brought back on
board. Marine research is expensive,
which is why researchers work around the
clock. The ROV went to 300 m, and the
team is excited to see the living
specimens. At this point, nobody has an
explanation for this mass invasion into
certain fjords.
12 live periphilusers have come on
board. Expedition leader Olf Bamstead is
pleased.
Each of the members of this
international crew wants one of the
specimens for their own research. Ghart
Yams is one of the lucky ones,
but he can't spend too long examining
it. In the light, the red pigment is
rapidly converting. It begins to
dissolve the Medusa, making holes in its
bell. The animal dies very quickly.
A surprise, this crab is eating the
gelatinous outer skin of the Medusa.
A jellyfish paradise in its own right
sits in the middle of the Atlantic Ocean
around the Azors. Our destination is the
island of Pico in the west of the
archipelago.
The Azors are of volcanic origin. This
group of islands is part of the
mid-Atlantic ridge, the geological
spreading zone that pulls Europe and
Africa further apart from America.
Climate and weather are determined by
the Gulf Stream, which bathes the Azors
in tropical warm water from the Gulf of
Mexico.
The ocean around the archipelago is
teeming with many marine mammals and
large fish like no other place in the
world.
Between the months of March and April,
24 different whale species appear around
Pico, looking for plankton, which is in
great abundance during that time.
Dolphins don't only hunt for fish, but
also squid, which sometimes come up to
the surface in large numbers. But these
dolphins are just playing.
Pilot whales also love squid. An adult
pilot whale can grow up to 8 m and feed
on about 50 kg of squid per day or more
accurately per night.
These sunfish are also interested in
softer food. They love to feed on all
kinds of jellyfish.
The beach on Pico also offers great
opportunities for jellyfish
connoisseurs.
These netted dog welks, a type of sea
snail, feed on the most dangerous ocean
inhabitants in the world. The snail
moves quickly. It has no problems with
the deadly tentacles.
This Portuguese man of war is not a true
jellyfish, but a colony of polyp. It
drifts through the world's oceans with a
gas-filled float. Each polip has a
specific task assigned to it. They would
not be able to survive on their own.
A loggerhead turtle poses real danger to
siphonophores.
They will not only feed on the harmless
moon jellies, but also the poisonous
polip colonies.
It seems possible to fill up on one of
these marine jell-o puddings.
A giant whale shark also takes advantage
of the large abundance of food off the
coast of Pico.
The largest fish in the ocean. It can
grow up to 14 m and filters small fish
like sardines and anchovies and plankton
out of the water with its large mouth.
This friendly giant is not dangerous to
people.
A mobular manta also picks up a bite of
sardines. Otherwise, it too feeds on
plankton.
Especially younger ones love to school.
The rolled up skin flaps seem like
little horns and give these animals a
demon-like look, which is why they're
also referred to as devil fish.
Underwater, the Azors consist mainly of
holes just like a Swiss cheese.
Countless caves go all through the lava
rock, which offers great habitats for
many marine creatures.
During our first dive, we encounter
Palagia Nocttiluca, commonly referred to
as the Mauve Stinger. It won't light up
unless touched or during the night.
The Pelagian octiluca can leave very
painful injuries. These jellies are
often the scourge of beachgoers.
We don't know why this school of jellies
stays in the cave. Maybe they drifted in
here. Or are they seeking cover from the
rough seas?
The next day, the animals leave the
netherworld of Pico again.
And whoever doesn't make it out in time
will fall prey to these bristle worms
that are lurking around waiting for
jellies to get caught. They love this
jell-like ocean inhabitant.
We're going deeper into the cave and
find thousands of cave shrimp. They
avoid light at all cost. Here they're
being hassled by a feistid hake.
In this light, it becomes clear how
fragile these shrimp are.
Their long antenna allow them to find
their way in this dark environment, and
they feel safest in large numbers. The
more members they have in their group,
the safer it is for each of them.
This Pelagian octiluca is a successful
hunter and several small crustations
have fallen prey to the jelly's
appendages. The nerve poison has an
immediate effect.
Directly under the surface, myriads of
many medusas are drifting by either
towards death or adulthood.
Many of them will end in the bellies of
loggerhead turtles.
Is it a jelly chain? No, it's a colony
of phalacia. They're not jellyfish, but
astonishingly are more closely related
to vertebrates, even us.
Palagian noctiluca is also looking for
plankton just like the falia.
But this lion's mane is relatively
harmless in comparison with this
Portuguese man of war.
These jellies can't dive, but they can
sail and cover thousands of kilometers
this way. But that's also a weakness as
they often drift ashore.
It catches its prey with its deadly
weapons immediately below the ocean
surface.
The sail is both a drawback and an
advantage. A school of fish can be
reached quickly and it carries an armada
of stinging appendages which can be
extended up to 10 m. The Portuguese man
of war will fire off whole batteries of
stinging cells at its victims. It's
clearly visible that the Medusa
stockpiles food, which is essential
because there are often days where the
hunt yields nothing at all. The poison
injected into the Portuguese Man of
War's victims can be compared to a
powerful snake venom.
Dramatic accidents with bthers are
frequent.
This girl is in great danger. The
Medusa.